Languages/Spanish/Madrigals-Spanish.md, before:

# Madrigals Magic Key to Spanish


## Difficult letter pronunciations
- B is *very* soft when between vowels.
- C is soft like "S" when before E or I. (Or "TH" in areas of Spain.)
- CC = "X".
- D is a *very* soft "TH" when at the end of a word.
- G is "H" when before E or I.
- H is silent.
- J = "H".
- LL = "Y".
- R is slightly trilled when it is *not* the first letter.
- R is *strongly* trilled when it *is* the first letter.
- RR is always strongly trilled.
- Y = "Y" (except for the word "Y" which is pronounced "EE").
- Z = "S" (Or "TH" in Spain.)
- QUE = "KE" like cape.
- QUI = "KEE"
- GUE = "GUE" like guest.
- GUI = "GEE" like geese.


## English-to-Spanish conversions
-al   -->    -al
-ble  -->    -ble
-or   -->    -or

-am   --> el -ama
-ant  --> el -ante
-cal  -->    -co    |           (sometimes)
-ce   -->           | la -cia
-cle  --> el -culo
-ct   -->    -cto  OR -to
-cy   -->           | la -cia
-em   --> el -ema
-ent  --> el -ente
-ic   --> el -ico
-in   -->           | la -ina
-ine  -->           | la -ina
-ing  -->    -ando (for -ar verbs)  OR  -iendo (for -er and -ir verbs)
-ist  --> el -ista
-ive  -->    -ivo
-ly   -->    -mente
-ment --> el -mento
-om   -->    -oma
-ous  -->    -oso
-ry   --> el -rio   | la -ria
-sion -->           | la -sión  (remember no double SS allowed)
-tion -->           | la -ción
-tor  -->    -dor               (sometimes)
-ty   -->           | la -dad
-ure  -->           | la -ura
-ute  --> el uto
-xy   -->           | la -xía   (where x is any consonant)

-j-   -->    -y-
-ph-  -->    -f-
-th-  -->    -t-

sx-   -->    esx-   |           (where x is any consonant)

(at/in locations) --> en
(doubled-letters) --> (only LL and RR are doubled and still have one sound)
(when "i" is between 2 vowels in Spanish) --> (change it to "y")
(when a noun modifies another noun, separate with "de")
(Adjectives of quantity or number precede the noun.)
("tan" means "so")
("tanto" means "so much")
("tantos" means "so many")
(Words related to travel begin with "via")
(Past participles are also used as adjectives.)
(Is a gerund the same as a present participle?)


## Noun-to-verb conversions within Spanish
-ación -->  (yo) -é  <-->  (él) -ó

There are many nouns that are identical to the first person present tense.
Those nouns are masuline:
-ar -->  (yo) -o  <-->  (el) -o


## Compound Verbs

A compound verb consists of an "auxiliary verb" followed by a another verb.

To get the Present Perfect tense, create the compound verb: present-tense-of-haber followed by the past-participle.

To get the Present Progressive tense, create the compound verb: present-tense-of-tener followed by the present-participle.


## Other Verb stuff

antes de INFINITIVE --> before (doing the verb)
después de INFINITIVE --> after (doing the verb)

antes de ARTICLE-AND-NOUN --> before (the event suggested by the noun)
después de ARTICLE-AND-NOUN --> after (the event suggested by the noun)


## Por vs Para
Por:
- Communication
  - por radio = on the radio
  - por cable =  by cable
  - por teléfono = on the phone
  - por televisión = on television
- Time
  - por una hora = for an hour
  - por una semana = for a week

Para:
- People
  - para mi mamá = for my mom
  - para Roberto = for Robert
  - para mí = for me
  - para el doctor = for the doctor
- Occasions
  - para la fiesta = for the party
  - para la clase = for the class


## Numbering
1st primer
2nd segundo
3rd tercer
4th cuarto
5th quinto
6th sexto
7th séptimo
8th octavo
9th noveno
10th décimo


## Que vs Qué
que = that
qué = what


# Spanish Tongue Twisters, Rhymes, and other fun stuff

Voy a ver.
I am going to see.

Yo se sé qué 
I will know what

Juego juego jugo del juez.
I play the judge's juice game.

El viejo viaje
The old trip

El nombre del hombre.
The name of the man.

Cuarto cuadra
Fourth block

Mi caballo es un caballero.
My horse is a gentleman.

Mi primero primo en primavera.
My first cousin in Spring.
 
Mi ropa roja.
My red clothes.

Él salta en la sala.
He jumps in the room.

Ésta está esta
It is this.

Él oye el ojo.
He hears the eye.

Dar dólar, dar dolor.
Give dollar, give pain.

Voy a ver el viaje viejo viajé veinte veces.
I am going to see the old trip I traveled twenty times.

Commit message:

clarify accent marks or not

Languages/Spanish/Madrigals-Spanish.md, after:

# Madrigals Magic Key to Spanish


## Difficult letter pronunciations
- B is *very* soft when between vowels.
- C is soft like "S" when before E or I. (Or "TH" in areas of Spain.)
- CC = "X".
- D is a *very* soft "TH" when at the end of a word.
- G is "H" when before E or I.
- H is silent.
- J = "H".
- LL = "Y".
- R is slightly trilled when it is *not* the first letter.
- R is *strongly* trilled when it *is* the first letter.
- RR is always strongly trilled.
- Y = "Y" (except for the word "Y" which is pronounced "EE").
- Z = "S" (Or "TH" in Spain.)
- QUE = "KE" like cape.
- QUI = "KEE"
- GUE = "GUE" like guest.
- GUI = "GEE" like geese.


## English-to-Spanish conversions
-al   -->    -al
-ble  -->    -ble
-or   -->    -or

-am   --> el -ama
-ant  --> el -ante
-cal  -->    -co    |           (sometimes)
-ce   -->           | la -cia
-cle  --> el -culo
-ct   -->    -cto  OR -to
-cy   -->           | la -cia
-em   --> el -ema
-ent  --> el -ente
-ic   --> el -ico
-in   -->           | la -ina
-ine  -->           | la -ina
-ing  -->    -ando (for -ar verbs)  OR  -iendo (for -er and -ir verbs)
-ist  --> el -ista
-ive  -->    -ivo
-ly   -->    -mente
-ment --> el -mento
-om   -->    -oma
-ous  -->    -oso
-ry   --> el -rio   | la -ria
-sion -->           | la -sión  (remember no double SS allowed)
-tion -->           | la -ción
-tor  -->    -dor               (sometimes)
-ty   -->           | la -dad
-ure  -->           | la -ura
-ute  --> el uto
-xy   -->           | la -xía   (where x is any consonant)

-j-   -->    -y-
-ph-  -->    -f-
-th-  -->    -t-

sx-   -->    esx-   |           (where x is any consonant)

(at/in locations) --> en
(doubled-letters) --> (only LL and RR are doubled and still have one sound)
(when "i" is between 2 vowels in Spanish) --> (change it to "y")
(when a noun modifies another noun, separate with "de")
(Adjectives of quantity or number precede the noun.)
("tan" means "so")
("tanto" means "so much")
("tantos" means "so many")
(Words related to travel begin with "via")
(Past participles are also used as adjectives.)
(Is a gerund the same as a present participle?)


## Noun-to-verb conversions within Spanish
-ación -->  (yo) -é  <-->  (él) -ó

There are many nouns that are identical to the first person present tense.
Those nouns are masuline:
-ar -->  (yo) -o  <-->  (el) -o


## Compound Verbs

A compound verb consists of an "auxiliary verb" followed by a another verb.

To get the Present Perfect tense, create the compound verb: present-tense-of-haber followed by the past-participle.

To get the Present Progressive tense, create the compound verb: present-tense-of-tener followed by the present-participle.


## Other Verb stuff

antes de INFINITIVE --> before (doing the verb)
después de INFINITIVE --> after (doing the verb)

antes de ARTICLE-AND-NOUN --> before (the event suggested by the noun)
después de ARTICLE-AND-NOUN --> after (the event suggested by the noun)


## Por vs Para
Por:
- Communication
  - por radio = on the radio
  - por cable =  by cable
  - por teléfono = on the phone
  - por televisión = on television
- Time
  - por una hora = for an hour
  - por una semana = for a week

Para:
- People
  - para mi mamá = for my mom
  - para Roberto = for Robert
  - para mí = for me
  - para el doctor = for the doctor
- Occasions
  - para la fiesta = for the party
  - para la clase = for the class


## Numbering
1st primer
2nd segundo
3rd tercer
4th cuarto
5th quinto
6th sexto
7th séptimo
8th octavo
9th noveno
10th décimo


## Accents or Not (Que vs Qué and other)
que = that
qué = what

For other accents - use accent mark if it can replace an equivalent using qué:
- If you can replace "cómo"   with "de qué manera",  it has the accent mark.
- If you can replace "cuándo" with "en qué momento", it has the accent mark.
- If you can replace "dónde"  with "en qué lugar",   it has the accent mark.
- If you can replace "quién"  with "qué persona",    it has the accent mark.

# Spanish Tongue Twisters, Rhymes, and other fun stuff

Voy a ver.
I am going to see.

Yo se sé qué 
I will know what

Juego juego jugo del juez.
I play the judge's juice game.

El viejo viaje
The old trip

El nombre del hombre.
The name of the man.

Cuarto cuadra
Fourth block

Mi caballo es un caballero.
My horse is a gentleman.

Mi primero primo en primavera.
My first cousin in Spring.
 
Mi ropa roja.
My red clothes.

Él salta en la sala.
He jumps in the room.

Ésta está esta
It is this.

Él oye el ojo.
He hears the eye.

Dar dólar, dar dolor.
Give dollar, give pain.

Voy a ver el viaje viejo viajé veinte veces.
I am going to see the old trip I traveled twenty times.
